Article: Building a truly cybernetic Jira support assistant that can independently navigate our knowledge base (#141)
Zuehlke/software-engineering-corner: src/articles/cybernetic-jira-support-assistant/index.md

---
title: 'Building a truly cybernetic Jira support assistant that can independently navigate our knowledge base'
description: >-

>   In DevOps, resolving JIRA tickets efficiently is critical, yet teams often waste time on issues that first-level support could have solved or on recurring problems that are hard to find due to JIRA’s exact-match search. To address this, I built a cybernetic AI tool. By indexing all JIRA support tickets in a vector database and combining it with an AI-driven chat interface, the tool retrieves similar past cases, suggests solutions, and streamlines the entire support workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In DevOps, resolving Jira tickets efficiently is critical, yet teams often waste time on issues that first-level support could have resolved or on recurring problems that are hard to find due to Jira’s exact-match search. To address this, I built a cybernetic AI-powered tool. By indexing all Jira support tickets in a vector database and combining this with an AI-driven chat interface, the tool retrieves similar past cases, suggests solutions, and streamlines the entire support workflow.
```

released: '2026-10-31T10:23:52.928Z'
cover: images/cover.jpg
author: Michael Lehmann
tags:
  - ai
  - tools

>   - semantik kernel

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - semantic kernel
```

shortDescription: >-

>   I built a cybernetic AI tool that streamlines the entire JIRA support workflow. This eliminates repetitive troubleshooting and helps teams resolve issues significantly faster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  I built a cybernetic AI-powered tool that streamlines the entire Jira support workflow. This eliminates repetitive troubleshooting and helps teams resolve issues significantly faster.
```

---

> During the project, I noticed that many support tickets were escalated to the development team even though they could have been resolved by first-level support. The necessary knowledge is usually well documented or already captured in previously solved tickets. At the same time, the business often submits the same types of requests repeatedly, even though the answers already exist in their own historical tickets. Yet even for us developers, finding the relevant information in older JIRA issues can be surprisingly difficult and time-consuming.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the project, I noticed that many support tickets were escalated to the development team, even though they could have been resolved by first-level support. In most cases, the necessary knowledge was already well documented or captured in previously resolved tickets. At the same time, the business often submitted the same types of requests repeatedly, even though the answers already existed in their historical tickets. Yet even for developers, finding relevant information in older Jira issues can be surprisingly difficult and time-consuming.
```

> At NDC Oslo 2024, I was particularly inspired by a talk on practical AI: [“How to add genuinely useful AI to your webapp (not just chatbots)” by Steve Sanderson](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TSNAvFJoP4M&list=PL03Lrmd9CiGdnMlwisvEjKClATrAooE2U&index=125&t=2327s). Two years later, during one of our Innovation Sprints, I finally sat down and built a small tool based on the ideas presented in that talk. The solution works in a very similar way to Sanderson’s example and focuses on adding AI where it actually creates value—by helping teams discover and reuse existing knowledge instead of reinventing it for every ticket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At NDC Oslo 2024, I was particularly inspired by a talk on practical AI: [“How to add genuinely useful AI to your webapp (not just chatbots)” by Steve Sanderson](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TSNAvFJoP4M&list=PL03Lrmd9CiGdnMlwisvEjKClATrAooE2U&index=125&t=2327s). Two years later, during one of our innovation sprints, I finally sat down and built a small tool based on the ideas presented in that talk. The solution works in a very similar way to Sanderson’s example and focuses on adding AI where it actually creates value—by helping teams discover and reuse existing knowledge rather than reinventing it for every ticket.
```

> ![Screenshot Support Ticket Assistant](./images/screenshot.png)

Reviewer: In the screenshot, German and English are being used. I would just stick to one language—preferably English. I would also suggest changing this in your Support Ticket Assistant application.

## Architecture Overview

> The solution consists of a small web application that sits on top of our existing JIRA support workflow and augments it with AI-powered search. On the frontend, a React application provides a simple chat-style interface where developers and support staff can describe their problem in natural language instead of trying to guess the right JIRA keywords.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The solution consists of a small web application that sits on top of our existing Jira support workflow and augments it with AI-powered search. On the frontend, a React application provides a simple, chat-style interface where developers and support staff can describe their problems in natural language instead of trying to guess the right Jira keywords.
```

> On the backend, an Aspire/.NET service uses the Microsoft AI Extensions built on top of the Semantic Kernel library to orchestrate the AI flow. It connects to JIRA to read support tickets, generates vector embeddings for each ticket, and stores them in a Qdrant vector database. Qdrant is responsible for performing fast similarity search over all historical tickets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the backend, an Aspire/.NET service uses Microsoft AI Extensions, built on top of the Semantic Kernel library, to orchestrate the AI flow. It connects to Jira to read support tickets, generates vector embeddings for each ticket, and stores them in a Qdrant vector database. Qdrant is responsible for performing fast similarity searches across all historical tickets.
```

> When a user sends a message in the chat UI, the backend forwards it to ChatGPT through the Semantic Kernel orchestration. The Qdrant vector database is registered as a custom AI tool, which means the model can autonomously decide when to perform a similarity search. Whenever additional context is needed, the model issues a tool call to Qdrant, retrieves the most relevant historical tickets, and incorporates this information into its response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user sends a message in the chat UI, the backend forwards it to ChatGPT through Semantic Kernel orchestration. The Qdrant vector database is registered as a custom AI tool, which means the model can autonomously decide when to perform a similarity search. Whenever additional context is needed, the model issues a tool call to Qdrant, retrieves the most relevant historical tickets, and incorporates that information into its response.
```

> This approach allows the model to ground its answers directly in our existing ticket history without requiring any manual retrieval logic on the backend. The result is a truly “cybernetic” assistant that can independently navigate our knowledge base and help the team avoid solving the same issues repeatedly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach allows the model to ground its answers directly in our existing ticket history without requiring any manual retrieval logic on the backend. The result is a truly “cybernetic” assistant that can independently navigate our knowledge base and help the team avoid repeatedly solving the same issues.
```

![Architecture](./images/architecture.png)

> ## Indexing the JIRA Tickets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Indexing the Jira Tickets
```

> All of this only works if the assistant has a good semantic representation of our existing tickets. For that, I added a background job that regularly walks through our JIRA project and writes the issues into the Semantic Kernel memory store, which is backed by Qdrant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of this only works if the assistant has a good semantic representation of our existing tickets. To achieve this, I added a background job that regularly walks through our Jira project and writes the issues into the Semantic Kernel memory store, which is backed by Qdrant.
```

> The `JiraIssueIndexService` is triggered as a Hangfire job and processes the issues in small batches:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `JiraIssueIndexService` is triggered as a Hangfire job and processes issues in small batches:
```

```csharp
public class JiraIssueIndexService
{
    private readonly IMemoryStore _semanticMemory;
    private readonly ITextEmbeddingGenerationService _embeddingGenerator;
    private readonly Jira _jira;
    private readonly ILogger<JiraIssueIndexService> _logger;

    [AutomaticRetry(Attempts = 0)]
    public async Task IndexIssuesAsync(CancellationToken cancellationToken)
    {
        await EnsureSemanticMemoryCollection(cancellationToken);

        var batchSize = 20;
        var offset = 0;
        int count;

        do
        {
            cancellationToken.ThrowIfCancellationRequested();

            _logger.LogInformation("Indexing Jira issues, offset: {Offset}, batch size: {BatchSize}", offset, batchSize);

            var issues = _jira.Issues.Queryable
                .Where(i => i.Project == "fic")
                .OrderBy(i => i.Created)
                .Skip(offset)
                .Take(batchSize)
                .ToList();

            await IndexIssuesAsync(issues, cancellationToken);

            offset += batchSize;
            count = issues.Count;
        }
        while (count >= batchSize);
    }
}
```

> For each issue, the service creates multiple embedding records: one for the summary, several for chunks of the description, and additional ones for the comments. This gives the model fine-grained access to the different parts of a ticket instead of forcing everything into a single giant embedding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each issue, the service creates multiple embedding records—one for the summary, several for chunks of the description, and additional ones for comments. This gives the model fine-grained access to the different parts of a ticket, instead of forcing everything into a single large embedding.
```

> ```cs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```csharp
```

private async IAsyncEnumerable<MemoryRecord> CreateMemoryRecordsAsync(
    Issue issue,
    [EnumeratorCancellation] CancellationToken cancellationToken)
{
    // Summary
    yield return await CreateMemoryRecordsForSummaryAsync(issue, cancellationToken);

    // Description (chunked)
    var descriptionChunks = await SplitChunks(issue.Description, cancellationToken);
    for (var i = 0; i < descriptionChunks.Count; i++)
    {
        var chunk = descriptionChunks[i];
        yield return await CreateMemoryRecordsForDescriptionChunkAsync(issue, i, chunk, cancellationToken);
    }

    // Comments (also chunked)
    var comments = await issue.GetCommentsAsync(cancellationToken);
    foreach (var comment in comments)
    {
        var commentChunks = await SplitChunks($"{comment.Body.EmptyIfNull()} {comment.Author}", cancellationToken);
        for (var i = 0; i < commentChunks.Count; i++)
        {
            var chunk = commentChunks[i];
            yield return await CreateMemoryRecordForCommentChunkAsync(issue, comment, i, chunk, cancellationToken);
        }
    }
}
```

> The `SplitChunks` helper uses `TextChunker.SplitMarkdownParagraphs` from Semantic Kernel to break longer descriptions and comments into smaller pieces before generating embeddings. Each `MemoryRecord` is created with a deterministic ID based on the JIRA key and the part type (summary, description chunk, comment chunk). That makes the job idempotent: running it again will upsert the same records instead of creating duplicates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `SplitChunks` helper uses `TextChunker.SplitMarkdownParagraphs` from Semantic Kernel to break longer descriptions and comments into smaller pieces before generating embeddings. Each `MemoryRecord` is created with a deterministic ID based on the Jira key and the part type (summary, description chunk, comment chunk). This makes the job idempotent—running it again will upsert the same records instead of creating duplicates.
```

> Finally, the service batches all `MemoryRecord` instances and upserts them into the Semantic Kernel memory store, which in turn writes them to Qdrant:

Reviewer: I looked up “upsert” in the dictionary, but I didn’t find an entry. However, its usage here is correct. :)

> ```cs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```csharp
```

Reviewer: Now I'm not so sure. Why do you use `cs` instead of `csharp`?

await _semanticMemory
    .UpsertBatchAsync(JiraIssueSemanticSearch.JiraTicketCollectionName, mappedRecords, cancellationToken)
    .ToListAsync(cancellationToken);
```

At this point, all relevant tickets (and their descriptions and comments) are indexed as vectors and ready to be used by the assistant.

## Letting the model drive the tools

> The assistant endpoint itself is intentionally quite small. It accepts the chat history from the frontend, adds a system message with instructions, and then lets the model decide when to call the JIRA search tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The assistant endpoint itself is intentionally quite small. It accepts the chat history from the frontend, adds a system message with instructions, and then lets the model decide when to call the Jira search tool.
```

        ToolMode = ChatToolMode.Auto,
        AdditionalProperties = new() { ["seed"] = 0 },
    };

    var streamingAnswer = chatClient.GetStreamingResponseAsync(messages, executionSettings, cancellationToken);
    …
});
```

There are a few important details here:

- The **system prompt** not only sets the context (Fiction Lab Portal support), it also forces the model to use the `searchJiraIssue` tool when working with existing tickets and to always justify its answer with a `<cite …>` tag.
- The `SearchJiraIssue` method is wrapped as a tool using `AIFunctionFactory.Create(...)` and added to the `Tools` collection in `ChatOptions`.
- `ToolMode = ChatToolMode.Auto` tells the model it is allowed to call the tool whenever it thinks it is useful.

The response is streamed back to the UI as a sequence of chunks so the user can see the answer as it is generated.

## The `searchJiraIssue` tool

The tool implementation lives in `SearchJiraContext`. It does three things:

1. Notifies the UI that a search is happening.
2. Uses semantic search over **Qdrant** to find relevant records.
3. Turns those records into a compact JSON structure the model can easily consume.

> ```cs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```csharp
```

            var comments = await issue.GetCommentsAsync();

            issues.Add((r, issue, comments));

            // Stream each hit to the UI so it can render links
            await httpContext.Response.WriteAsync(",\n");
            await httpContext.Response.WriteAsync(JsonSerializer.Serialize(
                new AssistantChatReplyItem(
                    AssistantChatReplyItemType.SearchResult,
                    string.Empty,
                    Guid.Parse(r.Metadata.Id),
                    key,
                    null)));
        }

        // Return the search results to the assistant
        return issues.Select(r => new
        {
            Key = GetJiraIssueKey(r.Item1),
            SearchResultId = r.Item1.Metadata.Id,
            Summary = r.Item2.Summary,
            Description = r.Item2.Description,
            Comments = r.Item3.Select(c => new
            {
                Author = c.Author,
                Body = c.Body,
            })
        });
    }
    finally
    {
        _semaphore.Release();
    }
}
```

A few noteworthy aspects:

- A `SemaphoreSlim` ensures that only one tool invocation writes to the HTTP response at a time.

> - The UI receives both a **“search started”** event and individual search result events `(AssistantChatReplyItemType.Search / SearchResult)`, which it can use to display live feedback and clickable JIRA links.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The UI receives both a **“search started”** event and individual search result events `(AssistantChatReplyItemType.Search / SearchResult)`, which it can use to display live feedback and clickable Jira links.
```

> - The object returned to the model includes the JIRA key, a `SearchResultId` (which the model must use in the `<cite …>` tag), the summary, the description, and all comments (author + body).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The object returned to the model includes the Jira key, a `SearchResultId` (which the model must use in the `<cite …>` tag), the summary, the description, and all comments (author + body).
```

The semantic search itself is implemented in `JiraIssueSemanticSearch`, which calls **Qdrant** directly:

> ```cs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```csharp
```

        {
            must = new[]
            {
                new { key = "external_source_name", match = new { value = $"issuekey:{issueKey}" } }
            }
        };

    var httpClient = services.GetQdrantHttpClient("vector-db");
    var response = await httpClient.PostAsync(
        $"collections/{JiraIssueSemanticSearch.JiraTicketCollectionName}/points/search",
        JsonContent.Create(new
        {
            vector = embedding,
            with_payload = new[] { "id", "text", "description", "external_source_name", "additional_metadata" },
            limit = 3,
            filter,
        }));

    var responseParsed = await response.Content.ReadFromJsonAsync<QdrantResult>();

    return responseParsed!.Result
        .Select(r => new MemoryQueryResult(
            new MemoryRecordMetadata(
                isReference: true,
                id: r.Payload.Id,
                text: r.Payload.Text,
                description: r.Payload.Description,
                externalSourceName: r.Payload.External_Source_Name,
                additionalMetadata: r.Payload.Additional_Metadata),
            r.Score,
            embedding: null))
        .ToList();
}
```

> This method takes the user’s query, embeds it, and then asks **Qdrant** for the three most similar chunks from the `JiraTickets` collection. The `external_source_name` payload contains the `issuekey:XYZ-123` tag, which is later parsed back into a real JIRA key with a simple regex so the tool can fetch the full ticket and its comments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method takes the user’s query, embeds it, and then queries **Qdrant** for the three most similar chunks from the `JiraTickets` collection. The `external_source_name` payload contains the `issuekey:XYZ-123` tag, which is later parsed back into a real Jira key using a simple regex so the tool can fetch the full ticket and its comments.
```

## The UI: streaming answers and live search results

> On the frontend I built a small React chat UI that feels similar to modern AI assistants, but is tailored to the Portal support workflow. The `ChatPage` component keeps a list of messages in state, renders them with a `ChatMessage` component, and sends the full conversation to the `/assistant/chat` endpoint whenever the user submits a prompt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the frontend, I built a small React chat UI that feels similar to modern AI assistants, but is tailored to the Portal support workflow. The `ChatPage` component keeps a list of messages in state, renders them with a `ChatMessage` component, and sends the full conversation to the `/assistant/chat` endpoint whenever the user submits a prompt.
```

> Instead of waiting for the full response, the UI streams the answer as it is generated. The backend writes JSON objects to the HTTP response, so the browser receives a sequence of chunks rather than a single JSON document. There is no direct equivalent to `.NET`’s `IAsyncEnumerable` on the frontend, so I added a small helper that turns the `fetch` stream into an RxJS `Observable<T>`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of waiting for the full response, the UI streams the answer as it is generated. The backend writes JSON objects to the HTTP response, so the browser receives a sequence of chunks rather than a single JSON document. There is no direct equivalent to `.NET`’s `IAsyncEnumerable` on the frontend, so I added a small helper that converts the `fetch` stream into an RxJS `Observable<T>`:
```

```ts
export function fromFetchStream<T>(input: RequestInfo, init?: RequestInit): Observable<T> {
    return new Observable<T>(observer => {
        const controller = new AbortController();

        fetch(input, { ...init, signal: controller.signal })
            .then(async response => {
                const reader = response.body?.getReader();
                const decoder = new JsonStreamDecoder();

                while (true) {
                    const { done, value } = await reader.read();
                    if (done) break;
                    if (!value) continue;

                    decoder.decodeChunk<T>(value, item => observer.next(item));
                }

                observer.complete();
            })
            .catch(err => observer.error(err));

        return () => controller.abort();
    });
}
```

> `JsonStreamDecoder` is a tiny stateful parser that buffers partial chunks, detects complete JSON objects based on `{ / }` nesting, and calls `decodedItemCallback` for each object. This lets the UI react to every `AssistantChatReplyItem` as soon as it arrives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`JsonStreamDecoder` is a tiny stateful parser that buffers partial chunks, detects complete JSON objects based on `{ / }` nesting, and calls `decodedItemCallback` for each object. This lets the UI to react to every `AssistantChatReplyItem` as soon as it arrives.
```

When the user sends a message, `ChatPage` subscribes to this observable:

```ts
const replyItems = fromFetchStream<AssistantChatReplyItem>("/api/assistant/chat", {
    method: "POST",
    body: JSON.stringify(request),
    headers: { "Content-Type": "application/json" },
});

const assistantMessage: MessageState = {
    message: { isAssistant: true, text: "" },
    responseItems: replyItems,
};

setMessages(prev => [...prev, assistantMessage]);

replyItems.subscribe({
    next: (item) => {
        if (item.Type === AssistantChatReplyItemType.AnswerChunk) {
            // append streamed text to the last assistant message
        }
    },
    complete: () => setIsStreaming(false),
    error: () => setIsStreaming(false),
});
```

The `ChatMessage` component then listens to the same `responseItems` observable and updates its internal state based on the item type:

> - `Search` → shows a small “Searching for: …” hint under the assistant avatar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Search` shows a small “Searching for: …” hint under the assistant avatar.
```

> - `SearchResult` → collects the JIRA keys and IDs so the UI can render clickable links.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `SearchResult` collects the Jira keys and IDs so the UI can render clickable links.
```

> - `SearchResult` → collects the JIRA keys and IDs so the UI can render clickable links.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `SearchResult` collects the Jira keys and IDs so the UI can render clickable links.
```

> - `AnswerChunk` → appends text to the assistant message and parses `<cite …>` tags to map citations back to the corresponding search results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `AnswerChunk` appends text to the assistant message and parses `<cite …>` tags to map citations back to the corresponding search results.
```

> In the rendered bubble I strip the `<cite>` tags from the main text and show the citations as a separate list of “Search results”, each linking directly to the matching JIRA issue. This keeps the answer readable while still making the underlying tickets fully transparent to the support agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the rendered bubble, I strip the `<cite>` tags from the main text and show the citations as a separate list of “Search results”, with each item linking directly to the corresponding Jira issue. This keeps the answer readable while still making the underlying tickets fully transparent to the support agent
```

## From question to answer

Putting it all together, a typical interaction looks like this:

1. The user describes their problem in the chat UI in natural language.
2. The backend forwards the full conversation (plus the system prompt) to the model and registers the `searchJiraIssue` tool in auto mode.
3. The model decides to call the tool, passing the user’s text as the `searchPhrase`.

> 4. The tool performs a semantic search in **Qdrant**, resolves the matching JIRA issues (including comments), and returns them as structured JSON.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. The tool performs a semantic search in **Qdrant**, resolves the matching Jira issues (including comments), and returns them as structured JSON.
```

5. The model reads these results, formulates an answer grounded in the existing tickets, and ends its reply with a `<cite …>` element that references one of the `SearchResultId` values.

> 6. The UI renders both the answer and the corresponding JIRA links, so support agents can immediately jump to the original issue if needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. The UI renders both the answer and the corresponding Jira links, so support agents can immediately jump to the original issue if needed.
```

This design keeps the orchestration logic very thin: the backend only wires up the tools and streams the updates, while the model itself decides when to search, what to cite, and how to explain the solution.

## Looking ahead

By the time you read this, it’s worth noting that this experiment is already a bit “old” in AI years. The ecosystem around LLMs, tooling, and integration patterns is moving incredibly fast. If I were to build the same assistant again today, I would probably not wire up the tools manually in the backend anymore.

> Instead, I would likely expose the JIRA search and vector database as tools via an MCP (Model Context Protocol) server. That would make the integration more modular and reusable: different clients could plug into the same capabilities, and the assistant could discover and use these tools without as much custom glue code. The core idea, however, would stay the same: let AI augment human support work by making existing knowledge easier to find and reuse.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, I would likely expose the Jira search and vector database as tools via an MCP (Model Context Protocol) server. That would make the integration more modular and reusable: different clients could plug into the same capabilities, and the assistant could discover and use these tools without as much custom glue code. The core idea, however, would stay the same: let AI augment human support work by making existing knowledge easier to find and reuse.
```

> Instead, I would likely expose the JIRA search and vector database as tools via an MCP (Model Context Protocol) server. That would make the integration more modular and reusable: different clients could plug into the same capabilities, and the assistant could discover and use these tools without as much custom glue code. The core idea, however, would stay the same: let AI augment human support work by making existing knowledge easier to find and reuse.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, I would likely expose Jira search and the vector database as tools via a Model Context Protocol (MCP) server. That would make the integration more modular and reusable: different clients could plug into the same capabilities, and the assistant could discover and use these tools without as much custom glue code. The core idea, however, would remain the same: letting AI augment human support work by making existing knowledge easier to find and reuse.
```
